---
title: "Software as Craft: a First Look at Syntropy"
layout: article
---

I've always been interested in coding as a craft - a thing to do with your
hands, your eyes and your mind. In many ways, I feel that a lot of the
satisfaction and accomplishment I get from making software comes from the
process itself, the doing of it, and not necessarily the end result. To quote
[one of my favorite musicians](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Waits):

> Most vagabonds I knowed don't ever want to find the culprit <br>
> That remains the object of their long relentless quest, <br>
> The obsession's in the chasing and not the apprehending, <br>
> The pursuit you see and never the arrest. <br>
>
> - Tom Waits, [Foreign Affair](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-iTLk3gjEec)

This is also one of the reasons why the recent AI "revolution" doesn't really
resonate with me. They say about us software developers that we always are
looking to automate our workflows, but personally this is not what's driving me.
I don't mind spending a few more minutes on writing *another REST controller*,
or another Javascript keyboard event handler, or just copying files and manually
setting up a new server. And I find in many cases I spend more time thinking
about a problem than actually coding the solution!

To me this is all part of the process, it's all enjoyable, and since I'm my own
boss, I have the luxury of taking my time. My clients know that I'm dependable
and available when there's a problem, and that I get the job done, so I can
concentrate on the process itself, and not worry so much about *velocity*.

This is also why I like to make my own tools, instead of just blindly relying on
some ready-made frameworks or libraries. It's not only about freedom, it's also
about the joy of creation, and the deeper understanding and knowledge of the
lower-level aspects of the system I'm building, be it parsing HTTP requests,
putting together SQL queries, issuing system calls, forking, trapping process
signals etc.

## Are We All Just CRUD Monkeys?

Now don't get me wrong, I totally understand the value of using frameworks such
as [Ruby on Rails](https://rubyonrails.org/), and the ecosystem that goes with
it. Rails provides teremendous value to developers, and an infrastructure for
building web apps in big teams. And it also demands a deep knowledge, but of a
different kind. Instead of learning about low-level stuff, you learn about what
solutions already exist for the problem you're trying to solve, and how to
integrate them into your app. It's sort of like the difference between knowing
how to properly use and sharpen a wood chisel, and knowing how to properly
use and maintain a tenoning machine.

It's perfectly fine to build yourself a career on top of Ruby on Rails, call
yourself a [CRUD
monkey](https://youtu.be/gcwzWzC7gUA?si=KkZRqG9w3U3v3BV-&t=326), and now with
the help of AI technologies you can have an *entire army* of CRUD monkeys at
your service. DHH says he's built an entire career on being a CRUD monkey, but
in a way that's not true. Rather, he's created Ruby on Rails (of course, with
the help of many other contributors), which is a great piece of software that in
many ways has revolutionized web development. So perhaps it's more accurate to
say that he made a career on *turning other people into CRUD monkeys*. But I
think for him also, there's the joy of working on Ruby on Rails itself, and not
only using it to make CRUD apps.

## Ruby is not Only Rails

One big problem in the Ruby community is the somewhat disproportionate place
Rails has in the ecosystem. While there's still a lot happening in the community
*off the Rails*, it's prettyclear that most of the activity is still around
Rails. At the last [Euruko
conference](https://noteflakes.com/articles/2025-09-23-euruko) in Viana do
Castelo, by my count more than half of the talks were about Rails or tools that
integrate with Rails. In and of itself this is not necessarily a bad thing, but
I found it a bit sad that there was no presence (as far as I could tell) for any
other web framework: no Roda, no Hanami, no Sinatra. Maybe this is just the
nature of things, but is it really desirable?

Rails is incredibly powerful, it provides so much value out of the box. But
there *are* other approaches possible, and maybe Rails can even learn from them.
There *are* precedents: [Merb](https://github.com/merb/merb) was a simpler and
faster alternative to Rails, before being *merged* into Rails.
[Sequel](https://sequel.jeremyevans.net/) has shown developers that there's a
better way to work with databases, and then ActiveRecord got Arel. So Rails can
actually gain from more innovation in the Ruby ecosystem.

## A First Look at Syntropy (part I)

So with that in mind, I'd like to share with you a first look at the web
framework I'm currently working on, which I call
[Syntropy](https://github.com/noteflakes/syntropy/), and which actually is what
drives this website.

> I chose the name Syntropy because in the last few years I've been passionate
> about [Syntropic
> Agroforestery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agroforestry#Syntropic_systems)
> as an approach to agriculture (I'm an amateur gardener), and to the
> cultivation of rich and diverse ecosystems that are also beneficial to human
> beings.
 
> Syntropy is kind of the inverse of entropy. While entropy is the natural
> tendency of a given system towards disorder and decay and homogeneity,
> syntropy is the power of life to create order out of chaos, to concentrate
> energy and matter in various life forms, and to create more and more diversity
> and abundance.
> 
> When you think about it, life is the only thing in the universe that can >
  defy entropy - it can create forms, it can concentrate energy and matter in
> living things. Syntropy is an approach that takes that observation and applies
> it to agriculture: how can we harness this power of life to overcome entropy,
> and how we can work with ecosystems to create more richness, more diversity, >
  and more abundance, not only for human beings, but for *all* living things?
>
> This is why I'm so passionate about this concept, because it offers us not
> only a vision of true abundance, but also an alternative to our current
> social, political and economic structures that have a "zero-sum game"
> approach.
>
> Syntropy is about living, abundant ecosystems teach us that in fact each of us
> is valuable to our societies and that sharing in the abundance just brings
> more abundance. Food for thought...

My original inspiration for Syntropy came from Jekyll - a static site
generator, which I have used previously for my blog. In Jekyll, like all other
SSGs I guess, the URL structure of the website mirrors the directory structure
of the source code. To illustrate what I mean, we can take the following
directory structure and the corresponding mappings to URLs:

```
files                     URLs
=====                     ====
+ site/
  + index.html            /
  + about.md              /about
  + blog/
    + 2025-01-foo.md      /blog/2025-01-foo
    + 2025-02-bar.md      /blog/2025-02-bar
```

Now in the above example we just have a few HTML and Markdown files, but we can
also have additional "asset" files such as CSS, JS and images. You can also see
that the routing scheme is very easy to understand: URLs are hierarchical in
nature, and the fact they mirror the directory structure makes it trivial to
organize the different pages of the site.

So the question I asked myself was: what if I had a tool like Jekyll for
creating websites but with support for dynamic content? What would be the
implications of that for the way the source code is organized? And how does this
relate to the
[Model-View-Controller](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller)
pattern?

## File-Based Routing

I spent some time researching existing solutions for this in Ruby or in other
programming languages. First of all there's
[Bridgetown](https://www.bridgetownrb.com), a Ruby-based SSG which also offers
the possibility of adding dynamic content via
[Roda](https://roda.jeremyevans.net/), which means that you can make hybrid
sites that use markdown for static content, and Roda for the dynamic parts. You
do need to express the dynamic routing with a Roda dynamic tree, which is
expressed in code. So, you can only use file-based routing for the static parts
of your site.

It should also be noted that PHP web apps by default use file-based routing, but
if you want to implement some more advanced patterns, such as clean URLs, or
maybe parametric routes, you'll probably need to fiddle with your HTTP server's
configuration (be it Apache, Nginx, Caddy or something else.)

I've also looked at a few different Javascript routers that use file-based
routing, such as [Expo](https://docs.expo.dev/router/introduction/),
[Tanstack Router](https://tanstack.com/router/latest), [React
Router](https://reactrouter.com/how-to/file-route-conventions), and finally
[SvelteKit](https://svelte.dev/docs/kit/routing).

I think out of all of those different solutions the most comprehensive one is
the SvelteKit router, but it does have some peculiarities: all routes must be
defined as directories, and for each route there's a convention for filenames
for different aspects of route controllers. Because SvelteKit deals with both
frontend and backend concerns, you need to put the frontend code and backend
code into separate files, namely `+page.js` and `+page.server.js`. You can also
create files for layouts and error handling, and for me with all those files it
gets a bit confusing. But On the other hand svelte kit introduces some useful
conventions for file-based routing:

- Files starting with an underscore (e.g. `_foo.js`) are considered internal and
  not exposed by the application.
- Parametric routes are defined using square brackets, e.g. `foo/[id].js`.
- Index files handle requests to their containing directory, so `/foo/index.js`
  points to `/foo`.

## Code Organization and Classless controllers

Another problem I had to think about was how to organize the controller code.
Let's take as an example a blog-type website, where all the pages are dynamic:

```
files                   URLs
=====                   ====
+ site/
  + index.rb            /
  + about.rb            /about
  + rss.rb              /rss
  + blog/
    + index.rb          /blog
    + new.rb            /blog/new
    + [slug]            /blog/[slug]
```

How should these controllers look? Do we define some uniform interface? How do
they get loaded? What if you need to compose them in some way? How do you deal
with middleware?

The design I came up with works as follows:

- The URL structure matches the directory structure of the app.
- Ruby source files are considered dynamic controllers that are loaded as modules
  (more on that later) and handle requests according to their path.
- Markdown files are served as HTML, with support for layouts and metadata.
- Anything else is static files: CSS, JS, media files etc.
- `index.rb` handles its immediate directory, e.g. `app/about/index.rb` handles
  `/about`.
- `foo.rb` handles the route minus the `.rb` extension, e.g. `app/about/foo.rb`
  handles `/foo`.
- A file name ending with a plus sign handles its entire subtree, e.g.
  `app/bar+.rb` handles `/bar`, `/bar/baz` etc.
- Parametric routes are handled by specifying the parameter in square brackets
  as the file name, e.g. `app/posts/[post_id].rb` handles `/posts/42` etc.
  Parametric routes can also be used on directories:
  `app/posts/[post_id]/edit.rb` will handle `/posts/42/edit`.
- Any file or directory starting with an underscore will be skipped by the
  router and will not be exposed by the server.

## Module Loading

So the fact that each dynamic route is basically some kind of controller, makes
it necessary to define an interface for loading those controllers that is both
flexible and easy to write. I wanted to avoid having to define a separate class
for each controller as one would do in Rails, and that means that each module
should be loaded in isolation, inside of a separate context object:

```ruby
class ModuleContext
  def self.load(env, code, fn)
    new(env).tap { it.instance_eval(code, fn) }
  end

  # Passing env lets us inject environment into module
  def initialize(env)
    @env = env
    singleton_class.const_set(:MODULE, self)
  end

  ...
end
```

We can then write code like this:

```ruby
export ->(req) { req.respond(foo) }

def foo
  'Hello, world!'
end
```

...where `export` sets the entrypoint of the module, in this case a lambda that
takes a request object as argument, and responds with a string. Another way to
write a controller would be with a `call` method:

```ruby
export self

def call(req)
  req.respond(foo)
end

def foo
  'Hello, world!'
end
```

Or perhaps with a Papercraft template:

```ruby
export template { |**|
  html {
    head {
      title 'My awesome app'
    }
    body {
      h1 'Hello!'
    }
  }
}
```

And if we have `export`, we might want to implement `import` as well in order to
allow expressing dependencies:

```ruby
layout = import '/_layout/default'
export layout.apply {
  p 'Hi!'
}
```

This means we can extend the idea of loadable modules and implement any part of
our app as a module, be it a controller, a view template, a layout template, a
model or any other functionality our app may need.

## Explicit Dependencies and Code Structure

Now that I'm starting to work with Syntropy and to build apps with it, I find
the `import/export` module loading mechanism really powerful. It sort of makes
you think about the interface: what is the module supposed to do, and what API
does it expose?

Of course, controller modules would have a callable interface, but any other
module can provide a singleton object as its interface, or it can export a
class, or any other object, such as a Papercraft template, or a configuration
hash. It's left to the programmer to decide how to connect the different parts
of the application, but since the dependencies between the modules are
explicitly expressed, we can follow the code more easily, and have a clear
understanding of the dependency graph.

And since we evaluate the code for each module in its own separate module
context, that means we get complete isolation of each module, so constants and
methods stay local to the module and do not leak to the global context. This
also makes it almost trivial to implement hot-reloading: with the `import`
functionality, we can track reverse dependencies, and thus propagate a
module reloading to all dependent modules.

## The Syntropy Routing Tree

So now that we saw how the app's Ruby modules may look, let's look at how
routing is done. As discussed above, we have the following conventions for file
names:

- `index.rb` handles its immediate directory, e.g. `app/about/index.rb` handles
  `/about`.
- `foo.rb` handles the route minus the `.rb` extension, e.g. `app/about/foo.rb`
  handles `/foo`.
- A file name ending with a plus sign handles its entire subtree, e.g.
  `app/bar+.rb` handles `/bar`, `/bar/baz` etc.
- Parametric routes are handled by specifying the parameter in square brackets
  as the file name, e.g. `app/posts/[post_id].rb` handles `/posts/42` etc.
  Parametric routes can also be used on directories:
  `app/posts/[post_id]/edit.rb` will handle `/posts/42/edit`.
- Any file or directory starting with an underscore will be skipped by the
  router and will not be exposed by the server.

With those conventions in mind I started working on a router implementation. My
main objectives were to build something simple, self contained and that worked
fast. When I implement a new feature, or when I do research on possible
solutions to a problem, I tend to start at the end, that is I prefer to first
work on the programming interface and the usage of the feature, rather than its
implementation. 

In the case of the router, I wanted to model it as a pure function that takes a
URL path as an input, and returns some kind of route object as an output. The
found route object contains information on how to process the incoming request,
and usually points to some controller entrypoint:

```ruby
router = ->(path) { ... }

# handle incoming request
route = router.(request.path)
route[:entrypoint].(request)
```

So how do we turn a bunch of directories and files into a routing function? the
first stage would be to scan all those directories and files and generate an
abstract routing tree that represents the app's file structure.

We can then handle each request by traversing the abstract routing tree and
matching entries against the path until we find the target route.

Note that if we *didn't* need to support wildcard or parametric routes, we
should have been able to statically map *clean* URLs to filenames, and then our
routing algorithm is simply a hash lookup, e.g.:

```ruby
url_map = Dir[File.join(app_dir, '**/*')].each_with_object({}) { |fn, map|
  map[clean_url(fn)] = make_route(fn)
}
router = ->(path) { url_map[path] }
```

But if our app has wildcard or parametric routes, that means we do need to
traverse the abstract routing tree, in order to find the correct route, and that
means we need to look at each segment of the request path separately, and match
routes against it.

Now, this is not a very hard problem, and we could easily write a tree traversal
algorithm that matches against path segments. But that also means we'll need to
traverse the abstract routing tree on each request, which may be slow. It
occurred to me that maybe this is one of those situations where code generation
might be helpful. Instead of traversing an abstract routing tree, we can use
`case` statements for matching against each path segment. In other words,
instead of representing the tree structure in data, we represent it in code.

Consider the following directory structure, implementing a part of GitHub's URL
structure.

```
+ site/
  + [org]/
  | + [repo]/
  |   + index.rb
  |   + issues/
  |   | + [id].rb
  | + index.rb
  + collections.rb
  + explore.rb
  + index.rb
```

We can then design a router that is tailor-made for this specific situation:

```ruby
->(path, params) {
  entry = @static_map[path]
  return entry if entry
  
  segments = path.split("/")
  case (s = segments[1])
  when s
    # /[org]
    params["org"] = s
    case (s = segments[2])
    when nil
      return @dynamic_map["/[org]"]
    when s
      # /[org]/[repo]
      params["repo"] = s
      case (s = segments[3])
      when nil
        return @dynamic_map["/[org]/[repo]"]
      when "issues"
        # /[org]/[repo]/issues
        case (s = segments[4])
        when s
          # /[org]/[repo]/issues/[id]
          params["id"] = s
          case (s = segments[5])
          when nil
            return @dynamic_map["/[org]/[repo]/issues/[id]"]
          end
        end
      end
    end
  end
  nil # no match
}```

The code above uses two hashes for route lookup: a `@static_map` and a
`@dynamic_map`. The dynamic map is used for parametric or wildcard routes. The
static map is used for all other routes: static files and static controllers.
The code first tries to do a static map lookup. If nothing is found it proceeds
to split the given request path into segments, and to match against each
segment.

This technique is remarkabe because instead of traversing the abstract routing
tree, and having to visit the different "leaves" of the tree in order to match
request path segments against them, we instead represent the tree in code as
nested `case` branches for each segment. This technique also performs very well,
surpassing any other design I could come up with.

So, the challenge here is how to generate code that uses this technique, and to
be able to do it for any arbitrary directory structure. The result is the
[`RoutingTree`](https://github.com/digital-fabric/syntropy/blob/main/lib/syntropy/routing_tree.rb)
class. It is built as a completely self-contained component that has zero
dependencies, and it has a functional design: you feed it the path of the app's
root directory, and it gives you back a router proc. That router proc's code is
generated dynamically after first scanning the directory structure.

## Middleware and file-based routing

Once we embrace file-based routing, adding support for middleware just follows
the directory structure: we can add support for `_hook.rb` files that
implement middleware. These handlers will be invoked for any routes in their
subtree. For instance, `app/posts/_hook.rb` will be invoked for requests to
`/posts`, `/posts/42`, `/posts/42/edit` etc.

The interface is remarkably simple - the middleware hook is simply a proc (or
callable) that accepts two arguments: the request object and the route handler
proc. Here's how an authorization middleware hook may look:

```ruby
export ->(req, proc) {
  if !validate_auth(req)
    req.redirect('/signin')
  else
    proc.(req)
  end
}
```

The fact that the scope of the middleware is determined by its location in the
app's directory structure also means that we can easily compose them, such that
each route will invoke all middleware hooks found up its file tree, and those
hooks will be executed in order from the most general (i.e. starting at the
root) to the most specific (ending in the route's containing directory.)

## Error handlers

The same goes for error handling - you can place error handlers anywhere in the
app's directory structure and each of them will apply to its subtree, such that
`/app/posts/_error.rb` will handle raised exception in requests to any route
under `/posts` but not to e.g. `/users`. When an exception is raised and not
rescued, it will bubble up to the first error handler found up the tree, so for
example you could have a general error handler that renders the error message
with your app's layout and styling, but also have an error handler for your
app's API that returns a JSON response:

```ruby
# /app/_error.rb
layout = import '/_layout/default'
export ->(req, error) {
  req.respond_html(
    layout.apply {
      h1 "Error: #{error.class}"
      p error.message
    },
    ':status' => error.http_status
  )
}

# /app/api/_error.rb
export ->(req, error) {
  req.respond_json(
    {
      error: error.class,
      message: error.message
    },
    ':status' => error.http_status
  )
}
```

## Common Controller Patterns

Now that we discussed the *outer* architecture of a Syntropy application -
consisting of file based routing and loadable modules, with support for
middleware and error handling, how do we actually write controllers? What do
they look like? The fact that Syntropy does not impose any structure on your
controllers may be daunting at first, but in fact Syntropy provides all the
tools needed for writing controllers.

If we look at the different kinds of controllers an application may have, some
common patterns emerge:

- **CRUD controller**: this is the typical Rails controller, which actually
  handles a few different URLs. If we had a `PostController`, it would actually
  handle `/posts`, `/posts/new`, `/posts/[id]` and `/posts/[id]/edit`, and the
  different actions are also related to different HTTP methods.
- **REST controller**: this type of controller handles a single URL endpoint,
  but its action differs according to the HTTP method used.
- **JSONRPC controller**: this controller only handles POST requests and
  typically will do some kind of dispatch to an internal handler.
- **Plain GET controller**: this controller just handles GET requests by
  rendering HTML or JSON.

For each of these controller types, we can easily come up with simple,
low-level constructs. For example, the REST controller may be expressed as
follows:

```ruby
# This will also return a METHOD NOT ALLOWED status for missing method
export dispatch_http_method

def get(req) = ...

def post(req) = ...

def delete(req) = ...
```

A JSONRPC controller may look as follows:

```ruby
# This also validates the request and formats the response
export dispatch_json_rpc

def add(x:, y:) = x + y

def mul(x:, y:) = x * y

# etc...
```

A plain GET controller may look as follows:

```ruby
template = import '/_views/foo'

export ->(req) {
  req.validate_http_method('get')
  req.respond_html(template.render)
}
```

In fact the open design of Syntropy modules makes it quite easy to create all
kinds of controller abstractions. While Ruby on Rails relies on scaffolding and
an `ApplicationController` class as the base for handling interactions with HTTP
clients, Syntropy gives you simple, composable building blocks you can apply to
your app's requirements.

## Syntropy - Freedom and Abundance

So this was a first look at Syntropy. In the next few articles I'll publish here
I'll continue discussing Syntropy's design as it relates to dealing with
databases and storage. Until then, please feel free to poke around the Syntropy
repository: https://github.com/noteflakes/syntropy/.
