---
title: Qeweney - a feature-rich HTTP request/response API for Ruby
date: 2021-12-03
layout: article
---

As you may know, in the last few months I've been working on
[Tipi](https://github.com/digital-fabric/tipi), a new web server for Ruby, with
innovative features such as support for HTTP/2, automatic SSL certificates, and
streaming request and response bodies. As part of the development process, I
also had to deal with how to represent HTTP requests and responses internally.

Tipi being a modern web server, with emphasis on concurrency, performance, and
streaming, I felt it was wrong to base it on the
[Rack](https://github.com/rack/rack) interface. While Rack is today ubiquitous
in the Ruby ecosystem—it underlies basically all Ruby web frameworks and all
Ruby app servers—it has some important limitations, especially as regards being
able to perform [HTTP
upgrades](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Upgrade) and
the streaming of request and response bodies.

Instead, the interface I came up with is a single `Request` class, with an
imperative API design. I have extracted this interface into a separate gem, for
reasons that I'll discuss below. I'm calling this interface
[Qeweney](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney) (pronounced "Q *'n'* A"). As
we'll see, Qeweney can be used inside of a Rack app, and can also be used to
drive a Rack app.

## The Request interface

Qeweney exposes a single class,
[`Request`](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney/blob/main/lib/qeweney/request.rb).
An instance of `Request` is initialized with headers and an adapter. The adapter is the
party actually responsible for the client connection. Tipi implements separate
adapters for
[HTTP/1](https://github.com/digital-fabric/tipi/blob/master/lib/tipi/http1_adapter.rb)
and
[HTTP/2](https://github.com/digital-fabric/tipi/blob/master/lib/tipi/http2_stream.rb)
connections. In the case of HTTP/2, the actual request adapter represents a
single HTTP/2 stream, backed by an HTTP/2 connection adapter, as shown in the
following diagram:

```
    +------+    +-------+                   +-------+    +-----+
    |Client|--->|HTTP/1 |------------------>|Request|--->|     |
    |      |<---|adapter|<------------------|       |<---|     |
    +------+    +-------+                   +-------+    |     |
                                                         |     |
    +------+    +-------+    +---------+    +-------+    |     |
    |Client|--->|       |--->|H2 stream|--->|Request|--->| Web |
    |      |<---|       |<---|adapter  |<---|       |<---| app |
    +------+    |HTTP/2 |    +---------+    +-------+    |     |
                |adapter|        ...                     |     |
                |       |    +---------+    +-------+    |     |
                |       |--->|H2 stream|--->|Request|--->|     |
                |       |----|adapter  |<---|       |<---|     |
                +-------+    +---------+    +-------+    +-----+
```

This design provides separation between the HTTP semantic layer (the
representation of different parts of HTTP requests and responses,) and the HTTP
transport layer, which changes according to the HTTP protocol version. In
addition, this design facilitates the testing of HTTP requests and responses,
for example with a [mock request
adapter](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney/blob/main/test/helper.rb#L14-L24).
It also allows the implementation of other transport methods, such as
[HTTP/3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP/3), or other custom transport
protocols for implementing custom HTTP proxies (I already have some ideas I'll
write about in the future.)

The `Request` API includes methods for inspecting the request headers, reading
the request body, and finally responding to the request. The most important
differentiator between the Qeweney API and the Rack interface is that with
Qeweney the response is generated imperatively, by using one of the response
APIs, while in Rack the response is the return value of an app function that
takes a request as argument. Let's compare the two approaches:

```ruby
# Rack
app = ->(env) do
  [
    200,
    {'Content-Type' => 'text/plain'},
    ['Hello, world!']
  ]
}

# Qeweney
app = ->(req) do
  req.respond('Hello, world!', 'Content-Type' => 'text/plain')
end
```

As shown above, a Rack app is a `Proc` that takes a `Hash` as its `env` argument
(containing information about the request and the server) and returns an `Array`
consisting of the HTTP status code, response headers and the response body
reprersented as an array.

In contrast, a Qeweney-based app takes a `Qeweney::Request` as its argument, and
it is the app's responsibility to respond to the request by *explicitly* calling
one of the response methods, such as `#respond`, `#send_headers`, `#send_chunk`
and `#finish`.

## Request information

One of the most crucial design decisions I made early on with Tipi was to allow
handling incoming requests without first reading and parsing the request body.
In Tipi, as soon as all request headers have been received, the request is
created and passed to the app. This allows an app to reject invalid or malicious
requests *before* the request body is read. It also allows Ruby apps to apply
backpressure, as they can control reading the request body.

With that in mind, let's examine how the request information is actually
represented in `Qeweney::Request`. As we saw, a request is instantiated by
providing it with an adapter instance, and a hash containing the request
headers. The header keys are represented by convention using lower case, and
also include the following meta-headers:

- `:method` - the HTTP method used (represented as an upper-case string.)
- `:path` - the path specified in the HTTP request line (including query
  parameters.)
- `:scheme` - the protocol scheme used, i.e. `http` or `https`.

It is important to note that these conventions concerning request headers should
be adhered to by any request adapter. Finally those are the conventions that
allow apps to behave identically for both HTTP/1 and HTTP/2 connections.

In order to facilitate the processing of request headers, Qeweney includes a
module named
[`RequestInfoMethods`](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney/blob/main/lib/qeweney/request_info.rb)
into the `Request` class. These method help us deal with such things as [URL
queries](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney/blob/10116eb5371157c968e224a8b58b6df331be9f23/lib/qeweney/request_info.rb#L53-L67)
and
[cookies](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney/blob/10116eb5371157c968e224a8b58b6df331be9f23/lib/qeweney/request_info.rb#L86-L102).

Here's an example of how these methods can be used:

```ruby
app = ->(req) do
  session = find_session(req.cookies['session-id'])
  validate_csrf_token(session, req.headers['x-csrf_token'])
  
  page_no = (req.query('page') || 1).to_i
  serve_page(req, page_no)
end
```

## Request body

Once the app is ready to read the request body, it can use `Request#read` for
reading the entire request body, or `Request#next_chunk` and
`Request#each_chunk` to read the request body in chunks.

Here's an example of how `#each_chunk` can be used to create a server that
responds with the request body converted to upper case:

```ruby
upper_caser = ->(req) do
  req.send_headers
  req.each_chunk { |c| req.send_chunk(c.upcase) }
  req.finish
end
```

In order to facilitate the handling of forms, Qeweney also includes the
`Request.parse_form_data` method which can be used to handle [form submission](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney/blob/10116eb5371157c968e224a8b58b6df331be9f23/lib/qeweney/request_info.rb#L106-L182):

```ruby
form_handler = ->(req) do
  form = Qeweney:::Request.parse_form_data(req.read, req.headers)
  submit_form(form)
  req.respond(nil, ':status' => Qeweney::Status::CREATED)
end
```

## Responding

When it's time to send out a response, `Qeweney::Request` provides the following
methods:

- `#respond(body, headers)` - send out a complete response
- `#send_headers(headers)` - send out headers, without finishing the response
- `#send_chunk(chunk, done: false)` - send a body chunk, possibly finishing the
  response
- `#finish()` - finish the response (when not using `respond`)

These APIs allow the app to either send the body all at one, or as shown in the
`upper_caser` example above, chunk by chunk. Note that Tipi's HTTP/1 adapter
will use [chunked
encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chunked_transfer_encoding) by default,
which lets apps send out streaming responses easily. By being able to send a
response chunk by chunk, apps are able to generate large responses without
having to buffer them in memory, thus lowering pressure on the Ruby GC, and the
app's memory footprint in general.

In a similar manner to the way Qeweney provides additional methods for
processing request headers, it also provides response methods (defined in the
[`Qeweney::ResponseMethods`
module](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney/blob/main/lib/qeweney/response.rb))
for generating responses more easily. Here are some of them:

```ruby
# redirect to another URL
req.redirect(alternative_url)

# redirect to HTTPS
req.redirect_to_https

# serve a static file
req.serve_file(file_path)

# serve from an IO
req.serve_io(io)

# serve from a Rack app
req.serve_rack(app)

# Upgrade to arbitrary protocol
req.upgrade(protocol)
```

Now these methods may seem almost banal (and they mostly are,) but `#serve_file`
method merits closer scrutiny, as it actually packs a lot of power behind its
modest method signature. It sets cache headers, validates `If-None-Match` and
`If-Modified-Since` headers included in the request, and responds with a `304
Not Modified` status code if the client's cache is valid. It also serves the
file compressed according to the `Accept-Encoding` request header, using either
the `deflate` or `gzip` algorithms.

Tipi further turbocharges the functionality provided by Qeweney using optimized,
protocol-specific methods for serving arbitrary responses from an IO object
(`Request#serve_file` uses `#serve_io` under the hood). Tipi's HTTP/1 adapter is
capable of sending requests from an IO by
[splicing](https://noteflakes.com/articles/2021-06-25-polyphony-june-edition#a-new-api-for-splicing-tofrom-pipes)
them to the client's socket connection, achieving up to 64% better throughput
for large files.

## Request routing

Qeweney also includes a basic [API for routing
requests](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney/blob/main/lib/qeweney/routing.rb)
without needing a web framework, or rolling your own. The Qeweney routing is
largely inspired by [Roda](http://roda.jeremyevans.net/), and in fact uses the
same mechanism (using `catch/throw`) behind the scenes. Here's a simple
demonstration of what Qeweney's router is capable of:

```ruby
app = ->(r) do
  r.route do
    r.on_root { r.redirect '/hello' }
    r.on('hello') do
      r.on_get('world') { r.respond 'Hello world' }
      r.on_get { r.respond 'Hello' }
      r.on_post do
        r.redirect '/'
      end
      r.default { r.respond nil, ':status' => 404 }
    end
  end
end
```

The Qeweney router is by no way comprehensive (it probably doesn't have half the
features of Roda,) nor does it have the best routing DSL, at least as far as I'm
concerned, but it offers a solid starting point for implementing web apps on top
of Qeweney, without needing to use any web framework.

## Extending Qeweney

Qeweney's API largely consists of a single class, `Qeweney::Request`, which
deals with all aspects of processing HTTP requests and responses, from the point
of view of the server. The different functionalities—request information,
responding, and routing—are implemented in separate modules that are then
`include`d into the `Request` class.

This design choice means that you don't need to deal with different objects and
different classes, everything related to requests and responses available
directly on the `Request` instance given to your web app. The downside is that
the `Request` class has a big surface area with dozens of methods, and will most
probably not satisfy OOP purists who demand no more than 10 methods per class,
and a single area of responsibility for each class. YMMV.

The point I want to make here, is that to me, adding request/response
functionality in this manner, by extending the `Request` class, makes a lot more
sense, especially when you want to add middleware to your app, which brings us
to:

## Qeweney and Middleware

One of the defining features of Rack is the use of middleware - small pieces of
specific HTTP functionality that you can plug into your application, without
making any change to your app's logic. This is due to Rack being a functional
interface (you feed a request in, and you get a response out.) All you need to
do to plug a middleware into your app is to call the middleware instead of your
app, and have the middleware call your app before or after it has done its
business. That way, a middleware can manipulate both the `env` parameter passed
to your app, as well as the response your app has generated, before it is being
returned to the app server.

In fact, you can put a whole bunch of middleware components in a pipe line, with
each of them performing specific tasks before and after your app has dealt with
the request.

As we saw above, Qeweney does not use a functional approach, but rather an
imperative one. Once the app has sent its response (by calling methods on the
given request,) there's no way to change it *post factum*.

So how can we use middleware under such circumstances? We do not necessarily
want to monkey-patch `Qeweney::Request` in order to provide specific
functionality, such as logging, validating request headers or setting various
response headers. In fact, it would be undesirable to change the behaviour of
the class, when all we need is to apply custom behaviour for specific instances
of the class. For example, we might want to apply [CSRF
protection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_request_forgery) only to
some requests but not to others. We might want to measure response latency for
some requests but not others.

Luckily, Ruby lets us do just that by letting us `extend` object instances with
methods from arbitray modules. Let's see how this technique can be applied to
creating middleware in Qeweney:

```ruby
module JSONContentTypeExtensions
  # overrides Qeweney::Request#respond
  def respond(body, headers = {})
    headers = headers.merge('Content-Type' => 'application/json')
    super(body, headers)
  end
end

def with_json_content_type(app)
  ->(req) do
    req.extend(JSONContentTypeExtensions)
    app.(req)
  end
end

payload = { 'message': 'Hello world!' }
app = ->(req) { req.respond(payload.to_json) }

# plug middleware in front of app
app = with_json_content_type(app)
```

The above example shows how a module modifying the stock behaviour of
`Qeweney::Request#respond` can be used to extend a specific *instance* of the
class. Note how we call `super` in the patched method. The
`with_json_content_type` builds the middleware by taking an app and returning a
modified `Proc` that first extends the request with the custom behaviour, then
passes it on to the app.

Here's another example that shows how we can implement a logging middleware:

```ruby
def with_logger(app, log)
  m = Module.new do
    define_method(:respond) do |body, headers = {}|
      start = Time.now
      super(body, headers)
      elapsed = Time.now - start
      log.info "Got #{self.headers}, respond with #{headers.inspect} (#{elapsed}s)"
    end
  end
  ->(req) do
    app.(req.extend(m))
  end
end
```

This example is quite dense, so let's analyze what it does. Since we want to be
able to inject a `log` instance into the middleware, we need to dynamically
override the `#repsond` method with a closure, in order to be able to access
`log` from within the method. Once that has been done, `with_logger` returns a
`Proc` that first extends the request with the dynamically defined module, then
calls the app.

Finally, in order to make it easier to write middleware for Qeweney, it will
eventually include a simple DSL for writing middleware. It will probably look
something like the following:

```ruby
with_logger = Qeweney.middleware do |log|
  respond do |body, headers = {}|
    start = Time.now
    super(body, headers)
    elapsed = Time.now - start
    logger.info "Responded with #{headers.inspect} (#{elapsed}s)"
  end
end

with_json_content_type = Qeweney.middleware do
  respond do |body, headers = {}|
    headers = headers.merge('Content-Type' => 'application/json')
    super(body, headers)
  end
end

payload = { 'message': 'Hello world!' }
app = ->(req) { req.respond(payload.to_json) }

# plug middleware
app = with_logger(with_json_content_type(app))
```

## What about Rack?

Last, but not least, I'd like to discuss how Qeweney fits in with a world where
practically all Ruby web apps are based on Rack. Qeweney can be used both as a
driver for Rack apps (e.g. if you want to run your Rack app on Tipi,) and to run
Qeweney apps on top of Rack servers such as
[Puma](https://github.com/puma/puma/) or
[Falcon](https://github.com/socketry/falcon).

In order to run your Rack app using Tipi, you don't need to do anything. Just
provide run Tipi with the path of your rack app, e.g.: `tipi myapp.ru`, and Tipi
will take care of doing the
[translation](https://github.com/digital-fabric/tipi/blob/master/lib/tipi/rack_adapter.rb).

If you prefer to develop your next web app using the Qeweney interface, it's
easy to convert it to a Rack app. Here's how:

```ruby
require 'qeweney'

my_qeweney_app = ->(req) do
  req.respond('Hello world!')
end

run Qeweney.rack(&my_qeweney_app)
```

## Conclusion

This has been an introduction to
[Qeweney](https://github.com/digital-fabric/qeweney), a new HTTP request/reponse
interface for Ruby web apps and servers. Its design was driven by the need for
concurrency, performance, and streaming capabilities that are currrently lacking
in Rack. While most developers using
[Tipi](https://github.com/digital-fabric/tipi) and the suite of tools [I'm
currently developing](https://github.com/digital-fabric), will not interact
directly with Qeweney, I wanted to give you an overview of its API and show some
of its capabilities. If this work interests you, please let me know by
[contacting me](https://noteflakes.com/about#contact). We can also hook up on
[GitHub](https://github.com/ciconia).
