---
title: "My Thoughts on Euruko"
layout: article
---

I've just got back home from Euruko last night. The conference ended on Friday,
but I decided to stay two more nights in Portugal and visit Porto. In between
walking all over the city, eating great food and enjoying the dancing and music
making in the street, I've also had time to think about all the wonderful people
I met at the conference (and even some I've met and talked to by chance on the
streets of Viana do Castelo and Porto), and the incredible experiences I've had
at Euruko.

First, I'd like to express my deep appreciation for the organizers, headed by
Henrique. This was my first ever programming conference that I go to, so I had
no idea how it was going to go. But it was obvious from the first moment, taking
the shuttle kindly offered by the conference to take us from the airport to
Viana, how much the conference organizers cared about making everybody feel
welcome. It really felt like Henrique and the team went out of their way to
tend all of our needs, from the great food and drinks available at all times, to
sharing the wonderful cultural heritage of Viana with us all.

I was also really impressed with the level of production. The branding work was
magnificent and was present everywhere down to the smallest details. It was also
much bigger than I expected. I imagined there would be about 200 people, but I
was told there were actually almost 600 of us. I've met a lot of people I knew
online, and even more people I didn't know at all, and I was really grateful for
the more personal encounters I've had. Talking about code is great, but talking
about life and sharing our common humanity is even better!

I've also noticed there were a lot more women than I imagined, and a lot more
older people (i.e. people of *my* age), and both of these observations made me
very happy. I'm a strong believer in diversity!

## An Auspicious Start

The conference kicked off with a keynote by Matz, the legendary creator of Ruby,
who 30-some years later still sets the tone for the Ruby community, putting the
accent on *developer happiness* and inspiring the saying "Matz is nice so we are
nice". At the beginning of his talk Matz said he was going to talk about "my
favorite things". He was reminiscing about how he got started with computing and
about the fact that it took him about 10 years from wanting to invent his own
programming language to actually gaining the knowledge and the experience to be
able to do it. Good things come to those who wait!

Matz has positioned the creation of Ruby at the intersection of three "favorite
things": human recognition, programming and language, and he continued by
talking about the different types of joy that he got from Ruby: the joy of
creation, the joy of design and the joy of power, and made a remark that for him
joy was more important than performance, hence the importance of "developer
happiness".

He talked about how now he was less involved in the implementation details of
Ruby, but with the recent work on ZJIT (Ruby's next JIT engine), more people can
now get involved in improving Ruby's performance. Matz continued by telling the
chinese parable of the [old man who lost his
horse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_old_man_lost_his_horse), sharing with
all of us an approach of openness and inquisitiveness, of refraining from
pre-judging what happens to us but rather saying "maybe, we'll see". He finished
his talk by saying that **our greatest treasure is the community**.

## The Euruko Talks

Following Matz is a tough act for anybody, but the following talk was just
fantastic: [Marco Roth](https://marcoroth.dev/) talked about his recent work on
[HERB](https://github.com/marcoroth/herb) and
[ReactionView](https://github.com/marcoroth/reactionview) which can really
revolutionize the Ruby on Rails view layer, and brings some important
innovations to developing web UI's using Ruby. His work is a great inspiration
to me personally, and I guess also to a lot of other people in the community.

What really blew my mind was that Marco has in fact built a parser for ERB
templates that builds an AST of the template, which then permits not only
compilation, but also all kinds of other operations such as linting, annotation,
analysis and perhaps in the future the addition of reactivity!

I found it really interesting that at more or less the same time, there are
three different people (Marco, myself and [Joel
Drapper](https://github.com/joeldrapper/), the author of
[Phlex](https://github.com/yippee-fun/phlex)) having the same idea of parsing
templates into ASTs! But this is how things are sometimes, maybe this has less
to do with our respective talents but rather with a certain *Zeitgeist* that
arises out of the emergence of tools such as
[Prism](https://github.com/ruby/prism).

I have been somewhat less attentive to the later talks, and have also missed
some of them because I wanted to talk to people, not only about technical stuff,
but also get to know people on a more personal level. One talk though that
really stood out to me was given by [Rémy
Hannequin](https://github.com/rhannequin), who talked about the value of niche
OSS projects, and his own project
[Astronoby](https://github.com/rhannequin/astronoby) which does astronomical
calculations. I guess it really struck a chord with me because my projects also
tend to be very niche. In fact, one of my goals in coming to Euruko was to share
with the Ruby community my own projects and maybe that way they'll become a bit
less niche!

## My Lightning Talk

So, arriving in Viana for the conference I already had an idea of what I wanted
to talk about, and had prepared some slides, which I submitted to the conference
organizers as a lightning talk (i.e. a talk that takes only 5 minutes). My
proposal was accepted and I was able to talk on stage in front of a lot of
people about [Papercraft](https://github.com/digital-fabric/papercraft), which
was a pretty scary experience, but I think it went OK - I stuck to the script I
prepared and was done within the allocated time.

Luckily for me, the day before my talk I met [Szymon
Fiedler](https://github.com/fidel), who not only has a warm and open
personality, he also gave me some tips on how to prepare myself for my lightning
talk, which proved really helpful, since I mentioned to him that I had terrible
stage fright.

So later that evening I just did what he said and practiced my script again and
again in front of the mirror, until I knew the text by heart and could take some
liberties with it, and felt more or less fluent with it while staying within the
5 minute allocated to my talk. So, while I was a bit shaky (I felt my voice
tremble,) I came off the stage not only with a sense of relief, but also of
accomplishment and a taste for more of it, because at the end of the day, like
all OSS developers I'm driven by the passion of creating something cool and
beautiful that I want to share with others.

## The PicoRuby Workshop

Immediately after giving my lightning talk I scrambled off to a side room to
join the workshop on [PicoRuby](https://picoruby.github.io/), which is an
implementation of Ruby for microcontrollers. Each of the participants got a
little kit of electronic bits (including a Raspberry Pi [Pico 2
W](https://www.raspberrypi.com/documentation/microcontrollers/pico-series.html#pico-2-family)
microcontroller) and a bunch of instructions on how to connect to it and get an
IRB session running on it.

It took some fiddling and some help from
[Hitoshi](https://github.com/hasumikin), our workshop guide, but once I had an
IRB session running on the microcontroller, it was only a question of hooking up
the various components to the breadboard and having fun with it. So, the first
thing to do was to connect a LED component and making it blink. I was so excited
to make this work, and it reminded of the joy I felt as a kid when I started
programming and making stuff work on my first computer (it was a
[TI-99/4A](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TI-99/4A)). We got to keep the kit,
and I know one day I'll find something useful to do with it.

## AI at Euruko

One important aspect of Euruko was the place of AI in it. There were I think
four different talks about AI tooling, and Matz even made mention of the fact
that he was now using Claude.code, which was a bit surprising to me. But I guess
even more surprising to me was hearing people expressing skepticism about AI. I
thought I was the only one!

So I was quite happy to listen to other people express apprehension at using
LLM's for programming, not so much for the political/social implications of it,
but just for the practical (or rather, impractical) aspects of it. But I'm still
not completely sure these tools don't have any merit, and am curious what value
they *can* bring to software development.

Out of the different AI tools presented at the conference, and which each had
their own approach to integration with Ruby programming workflows, the one that
was the most interesting to me was [RubyLLM](https://rubyllm.com/) by [Carmine
Paolino](https://github.com/crmne). To me it hits the right chord, in that it
provides a uniform interface to interacting with AI agents, but doesn't make too
many assumptions on what you want to do with it. To me this really hits the
sweet spot of abstraction - and also in a very Ruby-esque way!

## The End of Euruko

As the end of the conference drew nearer, I was less and less interested in
following the talks and frankly was a bit absent-minded. The afternoon after the
workshops (and the lightning talks) was composed of two talks about AI tools
(which personally didn't really resonate with me), but I was really interested
in the closing keynote, given by [Eileen
Uchitelle](https://github.com/eileencodes) of Shopify, which was about problems
with the "mythical modular monolith", or really problems with code organization,
especially in big companies.

Now, throughout the conference I felt like a very small fish swimming along all
those big fish, not only because I'm a nobody in the community and here I am
talking to all those people that are all over GitHub and HN and YouTube etc.,
but also because I'm a one-man company, and the conference was filled with
people from very big organizations, such as Shopify.

The fact that I'm not using Rails also made me feel somewhat marginalized, but I
quickly found out that I wasn't the only one. I was talking to [Chris
Hasinski](https://github.com/khasinski) and he suggested that I talk to Matz,
because Matz doesn't use Rails, and apparently in Japan they all don't use
Rails! Chris told me that actually at RubyKaigi (the Japanese Ruby conference)
it's taboo to talk about Rails, which I found absolutely hilarious.

This gave me an excuse to talk to Matz, so I jumped at the opportunity to
present myself to him. He was very kind, and indeed he told me he does not use
Rails, and that I should come to RubyKaigi and present my projects. Maybe I
will!

Going back to the closing keynote, what struck me was the difference in tone to
the opening keynote by Matz. Matz was talking about openness, the importance of
"human recognition", embracing the unknown, and the joy of programming. But
Eileen's talk was very dense (lots of text, I had some trouble following), and
the impression I got was that she was laying down all those rules for what
works, what doesn't.

The talk was also delivered in somewhat negative, absolute terms ("this doesn't
work", "that doesn't work"), and the injunctions were also somewhat
heavy-handed: improve developer education, *indoctrinate* developers, etc. While
she did stress how all code-organization problems are really human problems,
there was no compassion there, just a bunch of do's and dont's, and while she
mentioned developer happiness, I was wondering how can there be happiness
without compassion?

So to me it was a bit of a letdown, because it made the conference end on a
somewhat negative, cold tone. Maybe this talk would have fared better as an
internal talk at Shopify, or maybe in front of other big orgs that use Rails. To
me it was more of an example of how I *don't* want to do software development,
and how I don't want to deal with human problems in a work situation.

This experience also ties in to the drama currently going on in the Ruby
community, which Joel shared with all of us on the morning of the second day of
the conference. I was never a user of Rails (except for a very short time when
it first came out like 20 years ago), then again I really admired DHH for his
vision. But having read some of his recent writings I was quite alarmed that a
person with such views should hold such a prominent position in the Ruby
community, especially if that community cherishes diversity and inclusivity.

While there are some signs that DHH's toxic views have played a role in the
current crisis enveloping Ruby Central and the Rubygems system, what's even more
bothering to me is the heavy-handed approach we are seeing from Ruby Central,
and through them, Shopify (and perhaps other big actors in the Ruby community).
While I'm a long time Ruby developer, I've only been marginally involved in the
community, so to me a lot of this is new. But what is clear to me is that what I
don't want in my life, and what I don't want to see in the community, is big
corporations running the show and deciding for the rest of us what we can or
can't do, or how we do it.

This is the time to show that Ruby is not just Rails, and that there is a Ruby
ecosystem outside of Rails (or off the rails if you will). At Euruko I met some
of the people who are actively working on this problem, be it developing
[alternatives to bundler](https://github.com/spinel-coop/rv), or new and
[exciting](https://roda.jeremyevans.net/) [alternative](https://hanamirb.org/)
[web](https://github.com/yippee-fun) [frameworks](https://www.bridgetownrb.com/)
[for](https://github.com/digital-fabric/syntropy) Ruby.

The strength of an ecosystem is in its diversity. I'm already seeing this in the
recent work on HTML templating that I mentioned above, where different solutions
to the same problem arise at the same time and cross-fertilize. This can also
happen with other parts of the Ruby ecosystem. The more participation we have of
small players, the more resilient our community will be. The current crisis
teaches us that to prevent abuse of power in our community we need to double
down on creating and participating. I definitely intend to do my part to see
this happen.

## Last But Not Least

I think a special mention should be made about the incredible cultural heritage
that the Euruko organizers have shared with us all. It was such a joy to hear
and see the richness of Portuguese culture that was on display in the opening
and closing ceremonies! And also to taste it: I loved everything I tasted (and I
tried to eat mostly where the locals eat), and porto just makes you happy!

Hopefully, I'll come back many times more to this beautiful country and this
beautiful people. See you at the next Ruby conference!
