---
title: "Words Can Hurt: A Plea to the Ruby Community"
layout: article
---

I've been watching the recent drama within the Ruby community slowly devolve in
the last few days into name-calling and virtue-signalling, and frankly just
plain silliness. I won't repeat here the details of the disagreement, and I
won't link to any posts written about what's happened.

It is clear to me that some of this has to do with business interests of the
different parties involved, some of this has to do with political views, and
some of this apparently also has to with a clash of personalities. But what
really troubles me is not the details of the disagreements themselves, however
strongly each of us may feel about them, but rather how people have come to
treat each other over these disagreements.

While some people have been very vocal about what's happening, I believe many
people have been keeping quiet not because they don't care, or because they
don't have an opinion about the issue at hand, but because there's a growing
sense of violence - verbal violence, and people are afraid if they express
themselves they'll become targets for this violence. In fact, I'm pretty sure
when this article is published I'll become a target too. But I need to speak up.

## Words Can Hurt

A lot of people have reacted very strongly to DHH's [recent post about
London](https://world.hey.com/dhh/as-i-remember-london-e7d38e64), which I'll get
to in a moment, but I'd like to address an earlier post of his, which is in
my eyes more relevant to the present moment. In ["Words are not
violence"](https://world.hey.com/dhh/words-are-not-violence-c751f14f), David
talks about the murder of Charlie Kirk, and how some people have justified this
horrific act of violence as a response to Charlie's words:

> What I cannot come to terms with, though, is the modern equation of words with
> violence. The growing sense of permission that if the disagreement runs deep
> enough, then violence is a justified answer to settle it. That sounds so
> obvious that we shouldn't need to state it in a civil society, but clearly it
> is not.

Needless to say I agree with David that an argument or disagreement can *never*
serve as an excuse for physical violence. But I cannot agree that words cannot
be violent, they *can*, and unfortunately violent speech is becoming more and
more present in public discourse.

For the sake of discussion let's define verbal violence as any speech that you
would not wish on people dear to you, yourself included - name calling, hurtful
remarks, etc.

Verbal violence can be just as hurtful as physical violence - calling someone a
Nazi, a facist, a loony, stupid, retarded, and even worse *is* violent. [Verbal
abuse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verbal_abuse) can also in some cases be
illegal. You can think it's quite harmless to call someone names, but when done
repeatedly it can incite other people to physical violence (as in the case of
the late Charlie Kirk, or MLK, or Gandhi), or even cause people to [commit
suicide](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bullying#Effects).

## We All Should Strive for Compassion

Look, I believe that human kind is naturally kind and good. We all need to be
loved and respected, we all want dignity, we all want to have a peaceful,
meaningful life. No one wants to be despised or called names, so why do we do
this to each other? We should treat each other with respect and compassion.

I've read David's London post and was hurt. I'm an immigrant, so I know how hard
it is to be one, how hard it is to start a new life in a country where you
sometimes don't even know the language, don't have any network of friends and
family to rely on, where you don't know the social ettiquete, where you don't
know how to deal with the government, where your legal situation may be
precarious.

I know that immigration is a complex subject, I know that immigration sometimes
has negative effects on the so-called "native" population (which itself may be
composed of 2nd- or 3rd generation immigrants). I know that sometimes
immigration engenders crime. But then again, I also know those people, some of
whom have have been through hell, some of whom have had their lives broken, all
need dignity. Nobody wants to spend entire days out on the street in idleness.
They all want to have a dignified, productive life.

There's of course a lot more to be said about immigration, this can't be
summarized in the space of two paragraphs. But what I want to say is that we
should all give each other the benefit of the doubt, and assume that our
interlocutor is naturally good. When I meet a stranger, I want to be able to
treat them with compassion, not only for their sake, but also for *my* sake.
And if you're reading this and you're still bitter and cynical about my words,
here are some quotes for you from greater and smarter people than me:

> We must learn to live together as brothers or perish together as fools. Every
> individual must learn this, and every nation must learn this. - [Martin Luther
> King](https://www.rev.com/transcripts/the-american-dream-july-4th-speech-transcript-martin-luther-king-jr)

> Do to others as you would have them do to you. -
> [Jesus](https://www.biblestudytools.com/luke/6.html)

> You shall not hate your brother in your heart. - [Leviticus 19,
> 17](https://biblehub.com/nkjv/leviticus/19.htm)

David, if you're reading this, I don't know you personally, but I've been a fan
of your work for many years. I still am. Like many others, I started programming
in Ruby because of you. I think you're a true visionary, and I think in many
ways you've revolutionized how web apps are built. I really admire your work.
But your words have hurt me, and they have hurt others.

I don't hate you, I'm not even mad at you, I'm just sad that a person in your
position would not think their words through before saying them out loud. I know
you are opinionated, and I believe you mean well, but please consider that even
if you have strong convictions about political and societal matters, how you
express them can have a lot of impact on the community, and on people who look
up to you.

How should an immigrant who uses Ruby on Rails feel when you basically accuse
them of causing crime and of ruining London? How can they read your message as
anything but racist when you reduce them to "a statistic as evident as day when
you walk the streets of London now"? (How can it be evident if it were not for
their skin color, or their clothes?) Should people of color feel welcome at all at
RailsWorld? Should they feel welcome at 37signals?

I know you were hurt by people calling you a Nazi, because you wrote about it. I
would be hurt too. Nothing that you said can justify that, nothing that you said
can justify any violent act towards you. But that is exactly the point, words
can hurt, words can be violent!

So I ask you, please think about your words, and think about your message. As
BDFL of Rails (and you do this marvelously well when it's about technology), you
have a responsibility to the community. You are responsible for making everybody
feel welcome and included. I really hope my words find their way to your heart.

## A Plea to the Ruby Community

And to the Ruby community in general, I'd like to say this: please stop the
name-calling, please stop vilifying people. There's a big difference between
saying a person is expressing racist views (which can be debated rationally) and
saying a person is a "Nazi" (which doesn't allow any kind of debate).
Name-calling will not stop racism, name-calling will not rectify the situation,
and reducing another person to a label such as "Nazi", "facist" etc is to me
just as bad as racist speech. Being called names doesn't give you the right to
do the same. For the sake of us all, let's return to a calm and respectful
discourse, if not in society at large, then at least in the Ruby community.

I'm also really hopeful that the people behind the recent debacle around Ruby
Central find the courage in their hearts to come together and work on a solution
that will be acceptable to everybody involved, and that will bring relief to the
community. It is incumbent upon all of us to do our part to arrive at a peaceful
resolution.

> It is not for you to finish the work, but neither are you at liberty to
> neglect it. - Rabbi Tarfon, [Pirkey
> Avot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pirkei_Avot)

That's it, I will not speak publicly any further on this subject. If you want to
talk to me privately, please feel free to [contact](/about) me. I leave you with
the following words from another great visionary:

> Carefully watch your thoughts, for they become your words. Manage and watch
> your words, for they will become your actions. Consider and judge your
> actions, for they have become your habits. Acknowledge and watch your habits,
> for they shall become your values. Understand and embrace your values, for
> they become your destiny. - [Mahatma
> Gandhi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mahatma_Gandhi)
