---
title: HTML Elements
---

In Papercraft templates, HTML elements are generated by making receiver-less
method calls of the form `<tag>(inner_text, **attributes)`, or
`<tag>(**atributes) { <inner_html> }`. The method name (`<tag>`) indicates the
HTML tag (e.g. `h1`, `p`, etc.), the `inner_text` argument is the inner text of
the element, and attributes are indicated using keyword arguments. For the block
form, `<inner_html>` indicates nested HTML elements. As with any normal Ruby
method call, you can choose whether to use parentheses or to emit them.
Attributes are always optional.

Nested HTML elements are created by nesting method calls inside blocks. In that
case, the containing HTML element takes the form `<tag>(**attributes) { ...
}`. Here are some examples for HTML Elements:

```ruby
-> {
  # an empty br tag:
  br

  # a p tag with some text:
  p "Some text"

  # a p tag with text and attributes:
  p "Some text", class: "foo", id: "bar"

  # nested tags:
  div {
    h1 "Title"
    p {
      a "About", href: "/about"
    }
  }
}
```

## Custom HTML Tags

Papercraft allows you to easily use custom, non-standard tags in order to
customize your HTML markup. This technique is useful as an alternative to
specifying CSS classes or id's. Here's an example:

```ruby
-> {
  # the same, but with custom tags:
  container {
    left  { span "foo" }
    right { span "bar" }
  }
  #=> <container><left>...</left><right>...</right></container>
}
```

In some cases, you'd want to use the standard form for custom HTML elements
which use a hyphenated tag, e.g. `book-chapter`. In that case, replace the
hyphen with an underscore in your tag method call, e.g. `book_chapter`.
Papercraft will automatically convert any underscore in the tag back to a
hyphen.

## HTML Attributes

As discussed above, HTML attributes are specified as keyword arguments:

```ruby
# normal attributes:
div(class: "my-class", id: "my-id") #=> <div class="my-class" id="my-id"></div>

# boolean attributes:
input(name: "foo", disabled: true)  #=> <input name="foo" disabled>
input(name: "foo", disabled: false) #=> <input name="foo">

# hypenated attribute names:
p("text", "data-foo" => "bar") #=> <p data-foo="bar">text</p>
# or:
p(data_foo: "bar")     #=> <p data-foo="bar"></p>
```

## Using Dynamic Values in HTML Tags

Using dynamic values in tags is easy. Just pass them as parameters to your tag
method calls:

```ruby
->(id, title, opts, body) {
  card(id: id) {
    h2 title, **opts
    p body
  }
}
```
